Analyzing Student Perceptions in Course
Evaluation: A Hybrid Approach Using Topic
Modeling and LLM-Based Automatic Labeling
Anonymous Author(s)
Anonymous Institution
anonymous@example.com

Abstract. The course evaluation program is an institutional self-evaluation
initiative at a large public university in Northern Brazil that collects
student and faculty perceptions regarding dimensions such as student
assessment, teaching performance, and physical facilities. The instrument combines closed-ended questions with open fields aimed at positive, negative, and general comments. However, analyzing these comments is highly complex due to the large volume of data and the impracticality of manual textual analysis. Addressing this challenge, this
study applies topic modeling to identify recurrent themes and performs
automatic topic labeling via Generative Artificial Intelligence. Analyzing data from an undergraduate course, the study compared the LSA,
LDA, NMF, and BERTopic algorithms, and evaluated the performance
of the Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct LLM for the semantic labeling of the identified clusters. Results demonstrated BERTopic’s superior interpretability
in identifying latent patterns and unique topics not captured by other
models, alongside the high efficacy of the LLM in semantic interpretation. Ultimately, the proposed approach converts student feedback into
strategic intelligence, supporting data-driven decision-making for educational improvement and valuing student participation.
Keywords: Topic modeling · Automatic topic labeling · Student feedback.

1

Introduction

One of the biggest challenges in academic management is convert institutional
evaluation data in effective improvements. As noted by [8] and [6], reports frequently assume bureaucratic nature and generate a data volume hard to interpret
strategically. In Brazil, the Sistema Nacional de Avaliação da Educação Superior
(SINAES) governs the evaluation process based on three pillars: internal and
external institutional evaluation, course and student performance evaluation.
In line with these guidelines, within the scope of course evaluation, the public university conducts the self-assessment of undergraduate courses to identify
academic and administrative improvement opportunities. The program collects
students’ and teachers’ perceptions via online questionnaire that combines closed

2

Anonymous Author(s)

questions, on a Likert scale, and open fields, that are optional free text comments.
Although the program generate quantitative detailed reports, there is a lack of
systematic analysis of textual feedbacks due to the operational infeasibility of
manual processing.
To extract knowledge from this vast corpus, Natural Language Processing
(NLP) emerges as a viable solution. In this context, topic modeling allows grouping documents and discovering latent structures without prior labeling, based on
the co-occurrence of terms [14, 16, 24]. However, the topic modeling algorithms
output only isolated keywords, requiring subjective and cognitively demanding
human intervention to interpret the themes. Aiming to mitigate this limitation and the underutilization of program’s vast repository of textual data, the
main goal of this paper is to evaluate whether integrating topic modeling algorithms with automatic labeling via Generative Artificial Intelligence produces
interpretable semantic diagnoses suitable for supporting institutional analysis.
By applying this approach to student comments between 2019 and 2024, this
research presents three main contributions: (1) the development of an end-toend hybrid pipeline for institutional textual data, integrating LSA, LDA, NMF,
and BERTopic algorithms with LLM-based generative labeling; (2) a novel comparative methodology combining embeddings, cosine similarity, and graph-based
community detection to systematically identify common and exclusive thematic
niches across models; and (3) the practical implementation of this framework to
convert unstructured feedback into actionable strategic intelligence. Ultimately,
this approach equips managers and teachers with data-driven insights, filling a
regional gap in text clustering studies and valuing student perspectives in institutional self-evaluation.

2

Literature review

2.1

Topic modeling

Recent studies indicate the predominance of traditional frequency-based NLP
models, which disregard word order and semantic context [10]. In the analysis of
student feedback, [19] compared LDA, LSA, NMF, BERTopic, and PCA, highlighting NMF for its higher thematic recall and PCA for its superior accuracy.
Complementarily, [20] proposed the integration of NMF with the supervision
of human experts, demonstrating that, although the algorithm identifies latent
themes, human intervention is crucial to mitigate erroneous classifications. In
the context of remote learning during the pandemic, [17] analyzed BERTopic,
LDA, LSA, and NMF applied to student perceptions. The results indicated that
NMF better detailed mental health experiences, while BERTopic captured dense
logistical and educational nuances. In the context of social media, [30] evaluated Twitter interactions via BERTopic, LDA, and LSA, with the final analysis
demonstrating the robustness of BERTopic for short and informal texts.
In the studies analyzed, it was observed that although modeling algorithms
automate the identification of latent thematic patterns, the dependence on human intervention for the semantic interpretation and evaluation of the results

AI-Powered Topic Modeling for Institutional Student Feedback Analysis

3

remains a recurring limitation. This work seeks to address this limitation by integrating LLM for the interpretation of the results obtained, in addition to contributing by integrating the application of NLP to the context of self-assessment
in higher education.

2.2

Automatic topic labeling

The integration of LLMs into topic modeling pipelines has proven to be an
effective strategy for enhancing automatic topic summarization and labeling.
For instance, [21] used the GPT-3.5-Turbo-Instruct model alongside Persona
Prompting to refine topics generated by BERTopic. Pairwise semantic coherence validations demonstrated that topic subdivision allowed for a more effective
identification of dominant themes. In the context of social media, [1] proposed
a hybrid approach combining BERTopic and the Llama model to analyze feminist debates on Instagram. When instructed via prompts containing keywords
and representative documents, the LLM generated labels that showed high semantic alignment with descriptions provided by human analysts. Finally, [28]
introduced the TopicTag framework, which integrates LLMs to automate the interpretation of NMF-generated topics. By employing Prompt Tuning and Chain
of Thought (CoT) reasoning over keywords and representative documents, their
study demonstrated that the Llama model outperformed proprietary LLMs in
the semantic interpretation of clustered topics.
Although the reviewed literature has applications for automating topic labeling, studies of these techniques aimed at supporting decision-making in institutional evaluations remain underexplored. The present study aims to fill this
gap by applying this approach to student feedback, evaluating whether semantic
interpretation via LLM is capable of capturing the specificities of the university
context.

3

Methodology

For the present study, the Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD) methodology of Fayyad (1996) was adopted, focused on extracting valid patterns from data
through data mining. The work is organized based on the five stages of KDD,
presented in Figure 1, which illustrates an adaptation of the original methodology, since the preprocessing and transformation stages followed distinct flows to
suit the different modeling approaches.
The experiments were implemented in Python1 using the Jupyter Notebook
environment. Due to the processing cost required for multiple runs in the modeling and automatic labeling steps, the experiments were executed remotely via
Secure Shell (SSH) through a remote physical server.
1

https://www.python.org/

4

Anonymous Author(s)
1. SELECTION

Raw comments

FLOW A

FLOW B

2.1 PREPROCESSING

2.2 PREPROCESSING

Cleaning and normalization
Stopwords remove

Tokenization
Lemmatization

3.1 TRANSFORMATION
LSA: TF-IDF

LDA: Bag of Words

Cleaning and normalization

3.2 TRANSFORMATION

NMF: Esparse TF-IDF

BERTopic: Embeddings

4. DATA MINING
Models
LSA, LDA, NMF, BERTopic

K topics definition metrics

Coherence (C_v)
Diversity (IRBO)

5. INTERPRETATION AND EVALUATION

Qualitative Comparative Analysis

Automatic Labeling with LLM

Fig. 1. Flowchart of the steps in the adapted KDD methodology.

3.1

Selection

The research data was provided by the institution’s Information and Communication Technology Center (CTIC) in Comma-Separated Values (CSV) format,
covering the period from 2019 to 2024, except for the years 2020 and 2021,
in which the questionnaire was not applied due to the pandemic and remote
learning. Because it contains sensitive information, the data is not publicly
available and underwent a de-identification process before being provided for
this research, safeguarding the privacy of respondents. The databases contain
attributes such as course, academic unit, subject, teacher, schedule, location of
classes, answers to closed questions, and open comments, totaling 86,708 records
across all databases.
Initially, the database was filtered to restrict the scope to the target campus
and course, resulting in a corpus with 767 records. For the analysis, only identification columns such as year of evaluation, campus, academic unit, course,
subject, professor, and comments were retained. The structure of the comments
is divided into three categories: positive comments, intended for praise; negative comments, aimed at criticism; and general comments, intended for diverse
subjects such as pedagogical, structural, and institutional aspects.
3.2

Preprocessing

After defining the scope, preprocessing proceeded with the concatenation of data
from different academic years into a single dataset. Subsequently, text cleaning
techniques common to all models were applied, including conversion to lowercase
characters and removal of noise such as numbers, punctuation, and special characters. Additionally, an anonymization operation was incorporated to remove
explicit professor names from comments, starting from the “professor” attribute

AI-Powered Topic Modeling for Institutional Student Feedback Analysis

5

of the dataset itself. This decision aims to ensure institutional confidentiality
and eliminate noise that could bias clustering by individual identities instead of
academic themes.
Next, for the LSA, LDA, and NMF models, additional textual treatment was
applied, including tokenization, stopword removal, and term lemmatization. Finally, null and duplicate records were excluded, resulting in a final pre-processed
database with 619 valid records.
3.3

Transformation

For better data organization, the original columns for positive, negative, and general comments were unified into a single column called “comment”. This strategy
aimed to mitigate inconsistencies such as the insertion of criticisms in fields
intended for praise and vice versa. To preserve the origin of each record after
concatenation, the “label” column was created to classify the comment category:
0 for negative comment, 1 for positive, and 2 for general.
To prepare the LSA, LDA, and NMF models, a dictionary of terms was
constructed and manually refined to exclude contextual stopwords. From this
dictionary, vector representations were specifically tailored for each algorithm.
Given its probabilistic nature, LDA utilized the Bag of Words (BoW) matrix
to capture absolute term frequencies. In contrast, LSA and NMF adopted the
TF-IDF matrix to enhance semantic separation by weighting strictly informative
terms. Additionally, the NMF implementation employed a sparse TF-IDF matrix
to optimize memory and computational time during factorization by processing
only non-zero values.
For BERTopic, the texts were converted into embeddings using the PORTULAN/serafim335m-portuguese-pt-sentence-encoder-ir transformer [13]. This encoder was chosen for its superior performance in Semantic Text Similarity (STS) and Information Retrieval (IR) in Brazilian Portuguese due to its Sentence Encoder structure,
which is capable of capturing the deep context of the documents while handling
informality and syntactic noise.
3.4

Data Mining

The Mining stage is divided into two complementary subsections: the first one
presents and justifies the algorithms selected for topic modeling, while the second
one details the strategy for defining the number of topics for the models (k).
Topic modeling For the topic modeling stage, four distinct algorithms were
selected: LSA, LDA, NMF and BERTopic. The selection of these algorithms was
justified by the need to analyze the corpus under different premises, ensuring a
complementary extraction of students perceptions. The LSA [9], which applies
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) to the TF-IDF matrix, was chosen to establish an algorithmic baseline, mapping the global co-occurrence correlations of

6

Anonymous Author(s)

terms in the evaluations. LDA [3], by its probabilistic nature, was adopted under the principle that a document belongs to several topics, and it uses Bayesian
inference to estimate these latent distributions.
NMF, by factoring the non-negative sparse TF-IDF matrix into smaller matrices, was selected by its ability to generate additive representations, forcing the
separation of themes into clear semantic boundaries. Finally, BERTopic [15] was
picked to represent the neural counterpoint of the analysis, dealing with informality and syntactic complexity of the documents by capturing deep semantic
similarity through embeddings. The outputs of all topics models are avaliable in
Github’s project repository2 .
Defining k topics number A crucial step in modeling is defining the number of topics (k) to be extracted by the models, which determines the analysis
granularity: low values gerenate generalist themes, while high values excessively
fragment the subjects. Although related studies employ metrics that aim to mitigate the subjectivity of this choice, they do not always guarantee the quality of
the topics generated, since high statistical consistency is not necessarily synonymous with high human interpretability [7].
For this research, a hybrid strategy was adopted to define k for each model.
Initially, the coherence metric (Cv ) was used, which evaluates semantic interpretability by measuring the degree of confirmation between the most representative words of each grouping [25]. In addition, the Inverted Rank-Biased Overlap (IRBO) topic diversity, an adaptation of the Rank-Biased Overlap (RBO)
metric [29], was applied to assess the distinctness and non-redundance among
the generated themes [2]. This combined analysis, along with qualitative human
inspection, aimed to ensure the relevance and interpretability of the results. The
results obtained with this approach are discussed in the Subsection 4.1.
3.5

Interpretation and Evaluation

The final stage of the KDD Interpretation and Evaluation process was divided
into two phases: a qualitative comparative analysis of the results generated by
the modeling algorithms and the automatic labeling of the clusters via LLM.
Qualitative comparative analysis The qualitative comparative analysis consisted of inter-model topic alignment, which aimed to map convergences (common topics) that emerge in all models due to their high relevance in the corpus,
and singularities (exclusive topics) captured by only one of the techniques. For
the analysis, a hybrid approach based on [18] was adopted, combining topic
alignment with the evaluation of semantic interpretability.
The steps of the process, detailed in Figure 2, were as follows: (1) Vector
Representation: the 15 keywords from each topic were converted into embeddings via the PORTULAN/serafim-335m model, calculating the centroid (vector
2

https://anonymous.4open.science/r/student_perceptions_analysis_
BRACIS-EA48/

AI-Powered Topic Modeling for Institutional Student Feedback Analysis

7

mean) of the resulting lists; (2) Similarity Matrix: all-to-all cosine similarity
was applied to quantify semantic proximities and latent inter-model connections based on the cosine of the angle formed between them [26]; (3) Cutoff
Threshold: a sensitivity analysis was performed between 0.8 and 0.95, in which
experiments indicated that thresholds close to 0.8 merged distinct topics, while
values close to 0.95 fragmented equivalent themes. Thus, the threshold was set
at 0.94 to ensure semantic cohesion and the correct identification of analogous
topics; (4) Similarity Graph: based on network analysis methodologies [23], an
undirected graph was constructed where edges connect nodes (topics) whose similarity exceeds the defined threshold, enabling the identification of cross-model
and exclusive topics; (5) Community Detection: the Louvain algorithm [4]
was applied to group densely connected nodes, highlighting common topics across
models and isolating exclusive ones.

1. TOPICS VECTOR
REPRESENTATION (EMBEDDINGS)

LSA

2. SIMILARITY MATRIX

4. SIMILARITY GRAPH

[0,77; 0,80]

Tn...

3. THRESHOLDING
DEFINITION

...

Tn...

...

LDA
Tn...

[0,11; 0,14]
...

...

NMF

> 0.94

LSA
Tn...

Tn...

Tn...

[-0,56; 0,68]

Community 1:
common topics

LDA

LSA

Tn...

Tn...

Tn...

NMF
Tn...

BERTopic
Tn...

NMF
Tn...

Tn...

...

Tn...

5. COMMUNITIES DETECTION WITH
LOUVAIN ALGORITHM

LDA
Tn...

Community 2:
exclusive topics

BERTopic
Tn...

...
Tn...

[0,66; -0,58]

...

BERTopic

...

...

...

...

Tn...

Fig. 2. Steps in the process of inter-model topic alignment.

Automatic topic labeling To mitigate the subjectivity and cognitive load inherent in the manual interpretation of topics generated by modeling algorithms,
an automatic labeling pipeline based on Generative Artificial Intelligence was
implemented. For this task, the pre-trained model Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-Meta
was used. The choice of model was justified by its open-weight architecture,
offering interpretive capabilities and viable computational cost. Its 8 billion parameters enable efficient local execution, enhanced by support for GGUF quantization for CPU’s. Furthermore, the Instruct variant meets the requirement of
following complex prompt constraints. Despite its multilingual base, the model
offers robust training and consolidated support for the specificities of Brazilian
Portuguese.
The automated labeling process begins with the data entry stage, where
keywords and representative documents are incorporated. Following this, Prompt
Engineering techniques were applied, such as defining a Persona, imposing strict
guidelines (System Instructions), and the Zero-Shot approach. The complete
prompt structure is available in the project’s repository on GitHub. Finally, the
model processed the provided context to generate a short, descriptive label. The
results of this labeling can be seen in Section 4.3.

8

Anonymous Author(s)

4

Results and dicussions

The presentation of the results begins with the definition of the number of topics
(k), followed by the inter-model comparative analysis and concluding with automatic semantic labeling via LLM. Since the original dataset consists of texts
in Portuguese, all generated keywords and labels presented in this section have
been translated into English by the authors to facilitate understanding.
4.1

Topic granularity (k) definition

Initially, the search range was limited to k ∈ [2, 25], seeking a balance between
granularity and the practical usefulness of the topics. Empirically, the defined
limit of k = 25 aims to fit the analyzed corpus, preventing an excessive number
from fragmenting similar themes into multiples topics with subtle differences.
This restriction aligns with the central objective of producing interpretable semantic diagnoses to support institutional analysis, since an excessive number of
groupings would increase the cognitive load on managers during the analysis,
compromising the synthesis provided by the modeling.
Preliminary coherence analysis in Figure 3 showed that the LSA, LDA,
and BERTopic models tended to maximize their scores at very low granularity (k ∈ {2, 3}). However, such general groupings, although mathematically cohesive, offer low managerial utility because they do not discriminate specific
operational nuances. Given this limitation, the IRBO diversity metric was used
as a criterion to explore higher granularities.
Coherence (Cv) score per model and topics number

0.500
0.475

0.9
Topic diversity (IRBO) score

Coherence score (Cv)

0.450
0.425
0.400
0.375
0.350

Topic diversity (IRBO) score per model and topics number

1.0

Model
LSA
LDA
NMF
BERTopic

0.8

0.7

Model
LSA
LDA
NMF
BERTopic

0.6

0.325
0.300

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Topics number

Fig. 3. Coherence (Cv ) analysis for different values of k per model.

0.5

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Topics number

Fig. 4. Topic diversity analysis (IRBO)
for different values of k per model.

Figure 4 shows that the four models exhibit stability in the metric at k = 11,
indicating that the increase in the number of topics did not result in semantic
redundancy detectable by the metric. Based on the scores obtained in the two
metrics, the window of analytical interest was defined as the interval 11 ≤ k ≤
25. Within the established window, the value of k that maximized coherence
was selected, respecting the specificities of each algorithm. The results indicated

AI-Powered Topic Modeling for Institutional Student Feedback Analysis

9

k = 13 as the ideal point for the LDA and NMF models, k = 25 for the LSA,
and k = 14 for the BERTopic.

4.2

Qualitative comparative analysis inter-model

This subsection presents a qualitative comparative analysis between the four
models, with the aim of highlighting the convergences and divergences in the
identified thematic structures.

Common topics Common topics are those whose relevance in the corpus is
so significant that they consistently emerge across all approaches, regardless of
the model technique. As a result of community detection using the Louvain
algorithm, three Super-Topics were identified, characterized by strong internal
cohesion where the four models converged with cosine similarity equal to or
greater than the threshold of 0.94.
In the identified communities, there was the presence of more than one topic
belonging to the same model, as illustrated in Figure 5. To facilitate the interpretation of the results, the node with the highest degree was adopted as
the representative of the model in each community, since its high connectivity
reflects greater semantic proximity to the other topics, consolidating it as the
central point of convergence of the identified concept.
Super-Topic 0: 20 topics
NMF_Topic_4

NMF_Topic_9

LSA_Topic_5

Super-Topic 2: 15 topics
LDA_Topic_0

Super-Topic 3: 15 topics

LSA_Topic_20

LSA_Topic_17
LSA_Topic_23

NMF_Topic_1

NMF_Topic_6
NMF_Topic_2

LDA_Topic_7
LSA_Topic_15
LSA_Topic_0
LSA_Topic_6
LDA_Topic_1 LSA_Topic_21
LSA_Topic_4
LSA_Topic_8 LSA_Topic_1
LSA_Topic_7
LSA_Topic_2
LSA_Topic_13LSA_Topic_11
LSA_Topic_10
BERTopic_Topic_0
LDA_Topic_2
LSA_Topic_24
LSA_Topic_12
LSA_Topic_9 LDA_Topic_12
LDA_Topic_11
NMF_Topic_7
LSA_Topic_3

LSA_Topic_22
LDA_Topic_3
LSA_Topic_18
LSA_Topic_16

BERTopic_Topic_3
BERTopic_Topic_1

NMF_Topic_10

NMF_Topic_3

LSA_Topic_14
LDA_Topic_8

LDA_Topic_4
LDA_Topic_6

NMF_Topic_11

NMF_Topic_0LDA_Topic_10
LDA_Topic_9

LDA_Topic_5

Fig. 5. Inter-model Super-Topics identified using the Louvain algorithm.

In the Table 1 presented, Super-Topic 0 reflects a consensus regarding didactics and content transmission. It is observed that the LSA (1) and LDA (7)
models prioritized generic action verbs, which suggests that these models capture the most frequent latent structure of the corpus, but with less qualitative
specificity. In contrast, the NMF (4) isolated granular teaching adjectives, highlighting a more nuanced view of student perception. The BERTopic, in turn,
although presenting lexical redundancies, grouped terms that evidence the objective pedagogical dynamics (0).

10

Anonymous Author(s)

Table 1. Super-Topics and their respective topics extracted by the evaluated models.
Super-Topic LSA
LDA
NMF
BERTopic
0
(1) excellent, good, (7) subject, do, al- (4) well, explain, (0) excellent, aldidactic,
explain, ways, well, explain, teach, subject, inter- ways, great, good,
subject,
teach, class,
material, act, educate, know, didactic,
excelcontent, great, dis- great, interest, are, master, understand, lent, good, doubts,
cipline, good, pass, talk, take, time, con, lecture, rea- subject,
explains,
test, know, class, teach, didactic
soning, wonderful, content,
about,
miss
quite, efficient
super, objective
2
(21) semester, mas- (1)
class,
leave, (7) domain, subject, (3) domain, subject,
ter, well, wonderful, semester,
work, content,
about, content, quite, day,
to
lack,
about, teach,
subject, enough,
matter, about, well, passes,
form, to dedicate, some, topic, room, discipline, to teach, knowledge, taught,
difficult, to explain, content, can, give, Portuguese, to con- area, subjects, new,
to administer, to class, do, knowledge textualize, to teach, contextualized, exteach, commentary,
to deal with, form, cellent
subject, class
clear, high
3
(14) class, teach, (8) subject, form, (0) class, for, test, (1) content, test,
always,
attentive, class, teach, mate- content, to do, sub- room,
evaluation,
classroom, teaching rial, because, can, ject, work, evalua- besides,
tests,
methods, comment, do, student, man- tion, semester, little, passed,
teaching,
general, student, to ner, some, clear, dis- to leave, form, to be lack, little, only,
be absent, to help, cipline, only, evalua- able to, to achieve, assignments, teachmethod, test, to tion
to have
ing methods, time,
explain, willing
times

In Super-Topic 2, focused on the teacher’s domain of content, the grouping
generated by LSA resulted in mixed feelings on the same topic (21). This behavior can be attributed to its difficulty in distinguishing fine semantic contexts in
reduced-dimensionality spaces. LDA (1) showed sensitivity to the transformation
stage of the corpus, presenting lexical variations such as “aula” and “aulo” (in
portuguese), which reflects the impact of lemmatization in probabilistic models.
On the other hand, NMF and BERTopic captured terms focused on the applicability of the knowledge taught, which suggests that matrix factorization and
embeddings were able to highlight the student’s perspective regarding competencies that go beyond simple technical mastery.
Finally, in Super-Topic 3, which focuses on the evaluation process, LSA (14)
and LDA (8) still maintain a strong overlap in vocabulary that encompasses the
didactic dimension, diluting the specific focus on evaluation. In contrast, NMF
(0) and BERTopic (1) isolated the evaluative aspect by focusing on concrete
terms such as “test”, “assignments” and “content”. Given the results presented in
the analysis of common topics, it is suggested that NMF and BERTopic captured
more granular aspects compared to the LSA and LDA models, highlighting more
precise terms and making explicit the emerging theme in the topics.
Exclusive topics In the context of this research, exclusive topics are defined
as clusters that did not show cosine similarity equal to or above the threshold of
0.94 with any other topic generated by the other models. The objective of this
analysis is to verify if the models can extract thematic niches ignored by the other
algorithms. Although they have lower recurrence in the corpus, these exclusive
topics can reveal critical issues that require managerial attention and immediate
action. Table 2 presents the topics found and their respective algorithms.

AI-Powered Topic Modeling for Institutional Student Feedback Analysis

11

Table 2. Exclusive topics extracted by BERTopic and NMF.
Model
NMF

Keywords
(8) didaticar, ruim, fraco, possuir, atencao, objetiva, corrida, incrivel, ponto, objetivo,
parabem, abordar, pessimo, paciencia, abordagem
(12) faltar, aulo, sala, comunicacao, experiencia, avisar, pontual, dentro, visto, de
aquilo, dificilmente, apresentar, questoes, pessoal, compromisso
BERTopic (2) horario, vezes, motivos, alguns, tempo, muitas, demais, faltou, rapido, onibus,
noite, trabalho, muitos, pontual, sao
(4) didatica, pouco, excelente, intransigente, finge, didatico, desorganizado, pessima,
pontos, extremamente, sabe, bastante, irreais, ne, explosivo
(6) avaliacao, avaliacoes, poderia, correcao, claro, corrigidas, incluido, discursivas,
metodo, confusa, apenas, deixou, en, provas, formas
(8) nada, aderiu, consta, declarar, chega, nen, ocorreu, cedo, erro, social, nome, momento, avaliar, fez, nota
(9) profissional, ok, impecaveis, qualifiquado, divertido, xxxxxxxxxxxx, regular, maravilhoso, maravilhosa, presente, objetivo, nome, senhor, bom, horrivel
(10) comentarios, ofensivos, comentario, lidos, comentar, serao, positivos, negativos,
desnecessarios, nunca, outra, tanto, nada, hora, ”
(11) melhorar, precisa, deixar, didatica, experiencia, interesse, amor, atrair, ganhe,
ramo, jeito, interresante, evolua, exforcou, conteudista
(12) sexo, comentarios, sexuais, ex, sexual, desnecessarios, abordava, faz,
sobre, abuso, acerca, certos, aproximacao, exigindo, individuo
(13) slides, portugues, completo, tarefas, dominio, explicavamos, influenciou, portugol,
transporte, portuguesa, mandar, gastariamos, entregava, correta, perguntava

The critical highlight in the analysis was BERTopic’s unique ability to identify institutional risks by extracting terms such as “ofensivos”, “desnecessarios”
(10), “sexo” e “sexuais” (12). By grouping terms by semantic proximity, the model
prevented sensitive comments, which were infrequent in the dataset, from being
overlooked. In models that rely on the frequency and co-occurrence of terms,
these rare events were likely diluted into generic topics of dissatisfaction or ignored, given their low statistical representativeness.
Furthermore, BERTopic extracted niches of dissatisfaction related to the
teaching profile (4), although it is noteworthy that the same topic mixes feelings
by presenting “excelente” and “pessima” in the same grouping. This coexistence
of positive and negative terms within the same topic indicates an inherent characteristic of student feedback, where perception can be multifaceted, addressing
various feelings, although related to the same subject. The model also captured
external factors that reflect the student’s daily life (2), revealing logistical and
routine concerns that affect the academic experience. The presence of terms
with empty strings in topic 10 is due to the exhaustion of statistically relevant
terms in the vocabulary for its construction, a behavior that is expected and
results from the removal of stopwords combined with the MMR lexical diversity
technique implemented.
On the other hand, the NMF presented two unique topics that offer complementary analyses. Terms such as “didaticar”, “ruim”, “fraco” e “incrivel” (8),
reflect aspects related to the didactic approach and the quality of teaching, which
also mixes the polarity of feelings. This characteristic of grouping opposite polarities may be a common property in models that are not explicitly trained for
sentiment analysis. In its second topic (12), the algorithm points to factors of

12

Anonymous Author(s)

attendance and teacher communication, crucial aspects for academic management.
In summary, it is noted that BERTopic presented more topics addressing
rare and critical events, such as sensitive comments, which are extremely important for institutional management. Its embedding-based approach allows lowfrequency terms not to be diluted among the other groupings. For management
use, the embedding-based model proves suitable for highlighting comments that
address sensitive topics and inappropriate professional behaviors without them
being masked by the large volume of praise and criticism present in AVALIA.
4.3

Automatic generative topic labeling

Previous discussions and a review of the literature have shown that, although
topic modeling algorithms automate text clustering, the semantic interpretation
of these groups remains dependent on human curation. Therefore, this subsection employs generative automatic labeling with LLM as a support for the interpretability of generated topics, aiming to mitigate the overload of manual
inspection and provide diagnoses that support evaluation and decision-making
by academic managers. For the labeling stage, BERTopic was chosen to provide
the input data, a decision based on the interpretability of its results during the
modeling phase. The algorithm demonstrated a balance between coherence and
diversity, in addition to concentrating dominant themes with little lexical overlap
and isolating critical institutional niches.
With the goal of instructing the Llama-3.1 model in labeling, the construction
of the prompt used was structured to enhance the LLM’s interpretive capacity.
For data input, two variables were incorporated: i) Keywords: 15 terms representative of the extracted topic that synthesize the central content and act as
the semantic core of the grouping; and ii) Representative Documents: top
3 comments that, in the context of the research, best exemplify the extracted
topic. The inclusion of these representative documents aims to mitigate ambiguities that isolated keywords would not resolve.
Table 3 highlights the most relevant of the 14 LLM-generated topics, while the
complete list is available on GitHub. Notably, the labels “Comentários Desnecessários
e Ofensivos” (10) and “Comentários Sexuais Desnecessários em Sala de Aula”
(12) demonstrate the model’s sensitivity and inferential capacity. A key aspect
of this result was the LLM’s fidelity to the data, as it avoided premature legal
terminology (e.g “harassment”) without explicit textual evidence. This behavior is crucial to prevent the automated classification of serious offenses without
factual support, thereby ensuring an ethical and accurate institutional analysis.
In addition, LLM demonstrated skill in handling context and noise in the
data. In the label “Semestre Complicado por Falta de Comunicação e Greve”
(5), the “greve” aspect highlighted in the keywords remained explicit in the
topic labeling, combining this factor with communication difficulties. In the label
“Descontentamento com Ausência de Informações” (8), the noise in the data is
evident by reflecting the cluster formed by comments such as “nada a declarar”
in the modeling phase.

AI-Powered Topic Modeling for Institutional Student Feedback Analysis

13

Table 3. LLM-generated semantic labels for the identified topics.
LLM-Generated Label
Professor Excelente

Keywords
(0) excelente, sempre, otimo, bem, boa, didatica, otima, bom,
duvidas, assunto, explica, conteudo, sobre, super, objetiva
Semestre Complicado por Falta de (5) disciplinas, alguns, bom, dificuldades, apesar, greve,
Comunicação e Greve
proveitoso, sinceramente, otimos, materias, repassar, apos,
vez, geral, infelizmente
Descontentamento com Ausência de (8) nada, aderiu, consta, declarar, chega, nen, ocorreu, cedo,
Informações
erro, social, nome, momento, avaliar, fez, nota
Comentários Desnecessários e Ofen- (10) comentarios, ofensivos, comentario, lidos, comentar,
sivos
serao, positivos, negativos, desnecessarios, nunca, outra,
tanto, nada, hora, ”
Comentários Sexuais Desnecessários (12) sexo, comentarios, sexuais, ex, sexual, desnecessarios,
em Sala de Aula
abordava, faz, sobre, abuso, acerca, certos, aproximacao,
exigindo, individuo

Overall, the other labels generated are divided between praise and criticism of
the teacher. The criticisms address lack of respect (1), infrastructure and logistics
problems (2), disorganized (4) and inefficient (11 and 13) teaching methods, and
opposition to the evaluation method (6). The praises address the same axes of
teaching methods (0), mastery (3) and teacher profile (7), and class dynamics (9).
Considering the results generated, it is suggested that, in addition to categorizing
the subjects, the labeling interpreted the students’ intentionality by covering
the spectrum of evaluation, which offers a potential diagnosis for educational
management.

5

Considerations

This study validated the integration between topic modeling and labeling via
LLM for the analysis of the current repository, demonstrating that the combined application of these techniques was able to produce interpretable themes
and useful semantic labels to support institutional analysis. In the comparative
analysis, BERTopic excelled in forming cohesive clusters and detecting critical
themes, such as unethical conduct and sexual comments, which were diluted by
frequency-based approaches due to noise and lexical overlap. However, among the
classical algorithms, NMF demonstrated a punctual capacity to capture qualitative and behavioral aspects of teaching. Furthermore, the identification of
Super-Topics validated the central pillars of student evaluation via inter-model
consensus, showing that the structural problems detected were not artifacts of
a single algorithm.
The methodological difference in this study lay in the integration of LLM
for the interpretation of the results. The use of the Llama model proved to
be an appropriate approach to support the labeling of the clusters. More than
just synthesizing themes, LLM demonstrated ethical and contextual sensitivity when dealing with sensitive topics, avoiding premature legal terminology
and interpreting the intentionality behind noise. Practically, this approach provides a data-driven tool to monitor teaching quality, transforming bureaucratic
self-evaluation into a continuous improvement engine. Limitations include the

14

Anonymous Author(s)

computational cost of processing neural models. Future work suggests exploring
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) to create interactive virtual assistants,
democratizing access to institutional intelligence via natural language queries.
Code Availability The experimental code and results can be founded at https:
//anonymous.4open.science/r/student_perceptions_analysis_BRACIS-EA48/.
Acknowledgments. The authors acknowledge the use of LLM for linguistic refinement, taking full responsibility for the final content.

References
1. Almeida, T.B.M.: Identificação e interpretação de debates feministas no Instagram brasileiro: uma abordagem com BERTopic e LLaMA. Trabalho de Conclusão de Curso, Universidade Federal de Alagoas, Maceió (2024). http://www.
repositorio.ufal.br/jspui/handle/123456789/16466
2. Bianchi, F., Terragni, S., Hovy, D.: Pre-training is a Hot Topic: Contextualized
Document Embeddings Improve Topic Coherence. In: Zong, C., Xia, F., Li, W.,
Navigli, R. (eds.) ACL-IJCNLP 2021, vol. 2, pp. 759–766. Association for Computational Linguistics (2021). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-short.96
3. Blei, D.M., Ng, A.Y., Jordan, M.I.: Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research 3, 993–1022 (2003)
4. Blondel, V.D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R., Lefebvre, E.: Fast unfolding of
communities in large networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2008(10), P10008 (2008)
5. Brasil: Lei n. 10.861, de 14 de abril de 2004. Institui o Sistema Nacional
de Avaliação da Educação Superior – SINAES. Diário Oficial da União,
Brasília, DF (2004). https://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2004-2006/
2004/lei/l10.861.htm
6. Cardoso, M.S., d’Albuquerque, R.W., Tomás, M.C.: A Autoavaliação institutional
Numa Instituição De Ensino Superior Comunitária E Seu Potencial De Uso Para
Gestão Universitária. Regae: Revista de Gestão e Avaliação Educacional 11, e69550
(2022). https://doi.org/10.5902/2318133869550
7. Chang, J., Gerrish, S., Wang, C., Boyd-graber, J., Blei, D.: Reading Tea Leaves:
How Humans Interpret Topic Models. In: Bengio, Y., Schuurmans, D., Lafferty,
J., Williams, C., Culotta, A. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 22. Curran Associates, Inc. (2009)
8. de Sousa, J.V., Griboski, C.M., Gumesson, D.W.B.: Autoavaliação institutional no
marco do Sinaes: movimentos e tensões no uso dos resultados para a qualidade da
educação superior. Revista Cocar 29 (2024)
9. Deerwester, S., Dumais, S.T., Furnas, G.W., Landauer, T.K., Harshman, R.: Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science 41(6), 391–407 (1990)
10. Dieng, Adji B., Ruiz, F.J.R., Blei, D.M.: Topic Modeling in Embedding Spaces.
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 8, 439–453 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00325
11. Fayyad, U., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., Smyth, P.: From Data Mining to Knowledge
Discovery in Databases. AI Magazine 17(3), 37 (1996). https://doi.org/10.
1609/aimag.v17i3.1230

AI-Powered Topic Modeling for Institutional Student Feedback Analysis

15

12. Ferreira, L.S., et al.: Autoavaliação institutional no ensino superior: Percepções
sobre o Avalia-Graduação no curso de pedagogia do campus Bragança-UFPA.
ARACÊ 7(11), e10034 (2025). https://doi.org/10.56238/arev7n11-183
13. Gomes, L., et al.: Open Sentence Embeddings for Portuguese with the Serafim PT*
encoders family. arXiv:2407.19527 (2024)
14. Gresele, W.D., Barbosa, A.A., Urdan, A.T., Cunha, J.A.C.: Estudo bibliométrico
sobre transformação digital e sustentabilidade no ensino superior. Revista de
Gestão e Secretariado (2024)
15. Grootendorst, M.: BERTopic: Neural topic modeling with a class-based TF-IDF
procedure. arXiv:2203.05794 (2022)
16. Hammami, E., Faiz, R.: Text Clustering based on Multi-View Representations. In:
Proceedings of CIRCLE (2022)
17. Hayat, F., Shatnawi, S., Haig, E.: Comparative Analysis of Topic Modelling Approaches on Student Feedback. In: Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computer Supported Education, pp. 226–233 (2024). https://doi.org/
10.5220/0012890400003838
18. Kafiabad, S.T., Schiffauerova, A., Ebadi, A.: Decoding Funded Research: Comparative Analysis of Topic Models and Uncovering the Effect of Gender and Geographic
Location. arXiv:2510.18803 (2025)
19. Kardam, N., Makhsous, S.: A Comparative Analysis of Natural Language Processing Techniques for Analyzing Student Feedback about TA Support. In: 2024 ASEE
Annual Conference (2024)
20. Kardam, N., Wilson, D.: A Hybrid Approach to Natural Language Processing
for Analyzing Student Feedback about Faculty Support. In: 2024 ASEE Annual
Conference (2024). https://doi.org/10.18260/1-2--46447
21. Khandelwal, T.: Using LLM-Based Approaches to Enhance and Automate Topic
Labeling. arXiv:2502.18469 (2025)
22. Lee, D.D., Seung, H.S.: Learning the parts of objects by non-negative matrix factorization. Nature 401(6755), 788–791 (1999)
23. Myftaraj, E., Fata, Irena, Plasari, E.: A Topic Modeling Analysis of Circular Economy and Big Data Research Using BERTopic and SciBERT. International Journal
of Innovative Technology and Interdisciplinary Sciences 8(4), 1195–1243 (2025)
24. Pereira, V., Basilio, M.P., Santos, C.H.T.: PyBibX – a Python library for bibliometric and scientometric analysis powered with artificial intelligence tools. Data
Technologies and Applications 59(2), 302–337 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1108/
dta-08-2023-0461
25. Röder, M., Both, A., Hinneburg, A.: Exploring the space of topic coherence measures. In: Proceedings of the 8th ACM WSDM, pp. 399–408 (2015)
26. Salton, G., Wong, A., Yang, C.-S.: A vector space model for automatic indexing.
Communications of the ACM 18(11), 613–620 (1975)
27. Siqueira, T.D.A., Marques, N.R.P.C., et al.: Autoavaliação institutional nas universidades brasileiras. BIUS-Boletim Informativo Unimotrisaude em Sociogerontologia
51(45), 1–19 (2025)
28. Wanna, S., et al.: TopicTag: Automatic Annotation of NMF Topic Models Using
Chain of Thought and Prompt Tuning with LLMs. In: Proceedings of the ACM
Symposium on Document Engineering 2024, art. 8. ACM, New York (2024). https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3685650.3685667
29. Webber, W., Moffat, A., Zobel, J.: A similarity measure for indefinite rankings.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems 28(4), 1–38 (2010)

16

Anonymous Author(s)

30. Zankadi, H., Idrissi, A., Daoudi, N., Hilal, I.: Identifying learners’ topical interests
from social media content to enrich their course preferences in MOOCs using topic
modeling and NLP techniques. Education and Information Technologies 28(5),
5567–5584 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-022-11373-1

